WIP: Add exercise sheet for virtualization and containers (#30)
Simulation-Software-Engineering/Lecture-Material: virtualization-and-containers/material/exercise_vm_containers_text.md

# Working with Virtualization and Containers

**This exercise sheet is work in progress**

> In this exercise we will work the virtualization and container techniques that we have seen in the lecture. We will set up virtual machines manually first and then automatize the process. Afterwards we will build out own containers.

Author: I am fine without the "will" future here. Without the "will" parts it is also more consistent with the first exercise.

## Deadline

> Please finish the mandatory parts of the work before **18 November 2021 at 9:00**.

Author: You are right. I will remove it.

## Prerequisites

> - Installed and working VirtualBox, Vagrant and Docker.

Reviewer: You could link to the "homework" here.

Author: I added the link an rephrased that part a little bit.

- Some available space on your hard drive or a USB drive (about 8 GB to be safe).

## Before You Start

- Whenever `USERNAME` is mentioned in a code block or similar, you have to replace this by your GitLab username. For example, if a task states that you shoud use "[`USERNAME`] Ubuntu Server Installation", then you have to actually use "[`jaustar`] Ubuntu Server Installation" in case `jaustar` is the username.
- We try to check Vagrant and Docker submissions automatically using CI tools to give a better feeling for normal development workflows. This is an experimental feature and might not work perfectly. If you find some mistake, please add an issue in the corresponding repository and assign it to `jaustar`.
- If you are using a MacBook with ARM CPU and Parallels instead of VirtualBox, please mention this in the issues and pull requests that you create during this exercise. Ideally, use the `Parallels` label on GitLab for that.
- If you run into problems, check out the "Further Information" sections at the bottom of the tasks. These sections contain information about common pitfalls and link to the documentation of the used tools.

## Virtual Machines Using VirtualBox

> We will install "Ubuntu Server 20.04" a lightweight version of Ubuntu without graphical user interface. However, the ISO image has still 1.2 GB so you might want to start the [download of the image called "Ubuntu Server 20.04.3 LTS"](https://ubuntu.com/download/server) before continuing reading. If you see the name "Focal Fossa" some places, this is the codename of the 20.04 release of Ubuntu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will install "Ubuntu Server 20.04", a lightweight version of Ubuntu without graphical user interface. However, the ISO image has still 1.2 GB so you might want to start the [download of the image called "Ubuntu Server 20.04.3 LTS"](https://ubuntu.com/download/server) before continuing reading. If you see the name "Focal Fossa" some places, this is the codename of the 20.04 release of Ubuntu.
```
Actually, the "download task" is just the next one below. You could skip the complete point here.

Author: I take the change into the repository and slim it down during the rewriting.

### Tasks (VirtualBox)

- Download the ISO image from the [Ubuntu homepage](https://ubuntu.com/download/server. Please choose the "20.04.3 LTS" image which is called "ubuntu-20.04.3-live-server-amd64.iso"

> - While the image is being downloaded, you can start preparing the VM already. Create a new VM in VirtualBox called "Ubuntu Server" and assign 2048 MB of memory to it. If that is not possible on your machine, choose a larger or smaller amount of memory. Make sure the your virtual hard drive is large enough. 6 GB should be enough for this exercise. If you choose "dynamic allocation" the actual image size should not grow beyond 4 GB during this exercise. So it you are very limited on disk space you can also try a smaller disk size than 6 GB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- While the image is downloaded, you can start preparing the VM already. Create a new VM in VirtualBox called "Ubuntu Server" and assign 2048 MB of memory to it. If that is not possible on your machine, choose a larger or smaller amount of memory. Make sure the your virtual hard drive is large enough. A fixed size of 6 GB should be enough for this exercise. If you choose "dynamic allocation" the actual image size should not grow beyond 4 GB during this exercise. So it you are very limited on disk space you can also try a smaller disk size than 6 GB.
```

Author: I will rephrase this. I am not sure whether "fixed size" is completely correct here. It should be more something like maximum size.

> - Mount the `ubuntu-20.04.3-live-server-amd64.iso` to your virtual machine's cdrom drive (Storage -> Controller: IDE), make sure the graphics card has at least 32 MB video memory and start the VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Mount the `ubuntu-20.04.3-live-server-amd64.iso` to your virtual machine's cdrom drive (Storage -> Controller: IDE -> "Add optical drive"), make sure the graphics card has at least 32 MB video memory, and finally start the VM.
```
Is "optical drive" actually the correct choice? Worked for at least.

- When the boot process has finished you will be presented with Ubuntu's installation program. Go through it carefully.
  - Choose your preferred language and keyboard layout. Note that you cannot use your mouse in the menus instead you have to use your keyboard.
  - For most settings you can accept the default values Ubuntu suggests (mirror, empty proxy, using entire disk with LVM group, storage configuration etc.)
  - Confirm formatting of the virtual hard drive ("Confirm destructive action") if asked so.
- When setting up your user, please use your GitLab username, e.g. `jaustar`, as username and choose the username + VM, e.g. `jaustarvm`, as the server's name. The password you can choose freely. Note that the password cannot be empty. If you do not feel creative, use `vm` as password.
- When you are asked about the SSH Setup, you can decide whether you want to activate the `Install OpenSSH Server` option (using spacebar) or not. If you want to test out the SSH connection to the VM (optional task), you can activate it now. If you do not activate it here, you can install the OpenSSH server later as well.

> - In the next window you skip all suggested "Featured Server Snaps" to keep the size of the image minimal. It suggests common software used on the Ubuntu Server edition, such as Docker, for example. However, we do not need it here. Confirming your choice will start the installation procedure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the next window, skip all suggested "Featured Server Snaps" to keep the size of the image minimal. It suggests common software used on the Ubuntu Server edition, such as Docker, for example. However, we do not need it here. Confirming your choice will start the installation procedure.
```

> - The installation procedure might take a while since it will also install security updates. You can already start reading on the subsequent sections.

Reviewer: Some visual break after this item would be good.

Author: I will rewrite the exercise while keeping this in mind.

- Login using your username and password.
- We want to install [`neofetch`](https://github.com/dylanaraps/neofetch) which prints the system's information to the terminal and take a screenshot of this.
  - Install `neofetch` via `sudo apt update && sudo apt install -y neofetch`. This command will download and install `neofetch` using the package manager [`apt`](https://wiki.debian.org/Apt).
  - Clear the terminal using `clear` and run neofetch via by typing `neofetch` into the terminal and pressing `Enter`. It will show information about the Ubuntu version, available memory etc.
  - Take a screenshot via VirtualBox. At the top of the VirtualBox window you find the menu item `View`. There you find the option `Take Screenshot (Host+E)`. Save the screenshot as `neofetch-screenshot-USERNAME.png`.
- Now we want to open an issue on the GitLab  Repository [TODO: "Exercise Virtual Machines"](https://gitlab-sim.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/sse-test-group/exercise-virtual-machines) and upload the screenshot to document your success.
  - Open the issue.
    - As title choose "[`USERNAME`] Ubuntu Server Installation"

>     - Attach the screenshot ('Attach a file`). By default, the screenshot is saved in the folder of your VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Attach the screenshot ("Attach a file"). By default, the screenshot is saved in the folder of your VM.
```

    - If you did **not** assign 2048 MB of memory to the VM, please mention how much memory you assigned to it instead.

>     - Add the `VirtualBox` label to the issue and assign the issue to the lecturers `jaustar` and `uekermbn`. Finally, create the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Add the `VirtualBox` label to the issue and assign the issue to `jaustar`. Finally, create the issue.
```
You can actually only assign one person per issue on GitLab.

- If your mouse pointer gets caught, use the **right** `CTRL` (`STRG` on German keyboards) key on your keyboard to release it again.
- You can find more information on the installation procedure in the [Ubuntu Server documentation](https://ubuntu.com/server/docs).
- [Ubuntu Server download page](https://ubuntu.com/download/server)
- [VirtualBox Manual](https://www.virtualbox.org/manual/UserManual.html)
- If you want to set up SSH forwarding to your VM, you can find instructions, for example, [on the codebot homepage](https://codebots.com/docs/ubuntu-18-04-virtual-machine-setup). The instructions are for Ubuntu 18.04, but it also works for Ubuntu 20.04. Note that most of the steps are preconfigured in current VirtualBox releases, but it does not hurt to check whether the settings are set properly.

## Virtual Machines Using Vagrant

In the previous section we have set up a VM manually. This was quite tedious. Therefore, we want to automatize this process now by using [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) and setting up our own Vagrant box. We will provision a box based on VirtualBox by using shell scripts and the included provisioning tools of Vagrant.

### Tasks (Vagrant)

> - Fork the repository [TODO: "Exercise Virtual Machines"](https://gitlab-sim.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/sse-test-group/exercise-virtual-machines) from GitLab and create a branch to work on the fork. It will contain a `README.md` and a file called `bootstrap.sh`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fork the repository [TODO: "Exercise Virtual Machines"](https://gitlab-sim.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/sse-test-group/exercise-virtual-machines) from GitLab (set visibility to private) and create a branch to work on the fork. The repository should contain a `README.md` and a file called `bootstrap.sh`.
```

- We want to start from scratch so initialize a new box using `vagrant init` in inside this repository and add the resulting `Vagrantfile` to Git. Then adapt your `Vagrantfile` to incorporate the following settings:

>   - Your virtual machine must be based on the [`ubuntu/focal64` image](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/boxes#official-boxes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Your virtual machine must be based on the [`ubuntu/focal64` image](https://app.vagrantup.com/ubuntu/boxes/focal64). See [official boxes of Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/boxes#official-boxes).
```

  - The name of your VM must be `USERNAME-ubuntu-server`.

>   - The [box version](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/boxes/versioning) must be `0.1.0`.

Reviewer: This does not work. I get an error message that there is no `0.1.0` version of `ubuntu/focal64`.

Author: I have to rephrase that. The idea was that you set the version of your own box to 0.1.0.

>   - The VM must request [384 MB of main memory](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/providers/virtualbox/configuration).

Reviewer: Not more? (indeed worked for me with 384 MB), just found it confusing compared to the VB exercise.

Author: We can set it higher now. This low limit resulted from the plan of having a CI which should be able to build several Vagrant boxes in parallel. The machine the gitLab-runner is running on is low on memory. However, I ran into further issues and do not expect to a have a CI building VMs on Thursday.

Author: I changed it to 2048 MB now, to keep it consistent with the previous part of the exercise.

  - Run your box with `vagrant up` and make sure that everything works out as expected (`vagrant ssh`). If everything is fine, you can leave the VM and stop it.
- In the next step we want to provision your virtual machines. That means we want to install additional software, add extra files, and set some additional variables. We want to provision (`config.vm.provision`) the box in several steps.
  - Create a new file with the name `testfile` and add it to the repository. The file must contain your GitLab username as text. Add the file to your box using the [file provisioner](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning/file) and place it in the home directory of the `vagrant` user.

>   - We want an [additional shared folder](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/synced-folders/basic_usage), besides `/vagrant`, in our virtual machine. The directory where the `Vagrantfile` resides, i.e. `.`, should be mounted as `/mnt/shared/` in your container.

Reviewer: This is technically not part of `config.vm.provision`. It does not get updated when using `vagrant provision`. 
Maybe we could do two steps here? First pure provision (everything but the shared folder) and they should use `vagrant provision`. And afterwards the shared folder + `vagrant destroy` + `vargant up`?

Author: Splitting it into two parts sounds good to me. I will check this in more detail. I must admit I did not use `vagrant provision` when building my machine but rather `vagrant up --provision` or so. My memory is fading. :smile:

Reviewer: If you do a plain `vagrant up` when the machine is already running, Vagrant suggests to either use `vagrant provision` or `vagrant up --provision`.

Author: I split it up now to first set up the baseline of the VM and then add the environment variables and software using `vagrant provision`/`vagrant up --provision`. This way the workflow is closer to what Vagrant's documentation suggests (set up baseline and the incrementally extend the provisioning).

>   - Extend the file `bootstrap.sh` for provisioning your box. It should contain commands that you would usually use on the command line like in the VirtualBox task. The script must do the follwing:

Reviewer: I get an error
```
/tmp/vagrant-shell: line 1: !/usr/bin/env: No such file or directory
```

Author: I guess I deleted a `#` too much from the `bootstrap.sh` when cleaning it up some time.

Author: This is fixed now in the GitLab repository.

    - Set the environment variable `ENV_TEST_VARIABLE` to have the value of your GitLab username. You can achieve this by adding `export ENV_TEST_VARIABLE=USERNAME` to the `.bashrc` file which resides in the home directory of `vagrant` user.
    - Install `neofetch`.
    - **Note:** In the `bootstrap.sh` you do not have to prefix commands with `sudo` since the script is executed with superuser rights when Vagrant provisions the box.

    This script must be run by the [shell provisioner](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning/shell).
  - Rebuild your Vagrant box using the provisioning steps. Make sure that the software is installed, all files are present and the environment variable is set.

> - After checking your Vagrant box carefully, please open a merge request in the GitHub Repository [TODO: "Exercise Virtual Machines"](https://gitlab-sim.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/sse-test-group/exercise-virtual-machines).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- After checking your Vagrant box carefully, please open a merge request in the GitHub Repository [TODO: "Exercise Virtual Machines"](https://gitlab-sim.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/sse-test-group/exercise-virtual-machines):
```

>   - As title choose "[`USERNAME`] Vagrant Box Provisioning"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - As title, choose "[`USERNAME`] Vagrant Box Provisioning".
```

>   - Make sure all files are up to date (`testfile`, `bootstrap.sh`, `Vagrantfile`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Make sure all files are up to date (`testfile`, `bootstrap.sh`, `Vagrantfile`). Do not add the hidden folder `.vagrant` to Git.
```

>   - Add the label `Vagrant` label to the issue and assign the issue to the lecturers `jaustar` and `uekermbn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Add the label `Vagrant` label to the issue and assign the issue to `jaustar`.
```
Or to me. But two assignees are not possible.

>   - Double-check that all files are in the repository and up to date. Check everything carefully since a CI pipeline will try to build your Vagrant recipe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Double-check that all files are in the repository and up to date. Check everything carefully since a CI pipeline will try to build your Vagrant recipe.
  - Double-check that the source (the new branch on your fork) and the target branch (`main` of original repo) of the merge request is correct.
```

>   - If everything looks good, create the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If everything looks good, create the merge request.
```

- Check whether the CI pipeline could verify your submission. This may take some time due to the number of concurrent submission being limited. If read the error message carefully and fix your submission by creating a new commit.

### Further Information (Vagrant)

> - You might want to add the option `--provision` to the `vagrant up` command if you want to rebuild a box. In case the box is not being build/rebuild, please read the [documentation about provisioning](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning) carefully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You might want to add the option `--provision` to the `vagrant up` command if you want to rebuild a box (without destroying it first). In case the box is not being build/rebuild, please read the [documentation about provisioning](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/provisioning) carefully.
```

> - By default, Vagrant will install all files in your home directory. If Vagrant should use a different directory, you can set the environment variable `VAGRANT_HOME` to point the alternative directory. This could look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By default, Vagrant will install all files in your current directory. If Vagrant should use a different directory, you can set the environment variable `VAGRANT_HOME` to point the alternative directory. This could look like this:
```
?

Author: I have to rephrase that. Yes, Vagrant creates a directory `.vagrant` in the current directory, but that is usually not too large. You will also find the directory `${HOME}/.vagrant.d` on your machine which can grow large as Vagrant stores the downloaded base images (boxes) there.

Author: > Review part two: Vagrant Worked for me up to a few details. Took me 40 minutes, but I had to look at your slides again (a good student would have done that already wink )

Good to hear that we are not too far off regarding time (yet). I rather feared that this part of the exercise would be too short.

  - Create a new file with the name `testfile` and add it to the repository. The file should contain your GitLab username as text. Add the file to your container and place it in directory `/testfiles`.
  - Set the environment variable `ENV_TEST_VARIABLE` to have the value of your GitLab username.
  - Make sure that the default command to be executed when running the container is `/bin/bash`.
  - Install `neofetch`.
  - **Note:** In the `Dockerfile` you do not have to prefix commands such as `apt` with `sudo` since the script is executed with superuser rights.
- Test your Docker container locally. Are all variables set and files available?
  - **Note:** If you rebuild your container often, you might end up with dangling containers. You can remove them (and unused images, containers,or objects) with [`docker [image|container|system] prune`)](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/system_prune/) depending on what you want to remove.
- Open a merge request in the GitHub Repository [TODO: "Exercise Containers"](https://gitlab-sim.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/sse-test-group/exercise-containers).

>   - As title choose "[`USERNAME`] Docker Container Recipe"
>   - Make sure all files are up to date (`testfile`, `Dockerfile`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - As title choose "[`USERNAME`] Docker Container Recipe".
  - Make sure all files are up to date (`testfile`, `Dockerfile`).
```

>   - Add the label `Docker` label to the issue and assign the issue to the lecturers `jaustar` and `uekermbn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Add the label `Docker` to the issue and assign the issue to `jaustar`.
```

  - Double-check that all files are in the repository and up to date. Check everything carefully since a CI pipeline will try to build your Docker recipe.

>   - If everything looks good, create the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If everything looks good, create the merge request.
```

> - Check whether the CI pipeline could verify your submission. This may take some time due to the number of concurrent submission being limited. If read the error message carefully and fix your submission by creating a new commit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check whether the CI pipeline could verify your submission. This may take some time due to the number of concurrent submission being limited. If it fails, read the error message carefully and fix your submission by creating a new commit.
```
